# Why are so many people dying on US roads?

In 2016, the Department of Transportation released a harrowing statistic: 2,348 more people died on US roads in 2015 than the year before. This was the biggest single year jump since 1966, and in response the DOT released a [call-to-action](https://web-beta.archive.org/web/20160831091347/http://www.nhtsa.gov/About+NHTSA/Press+Releases/traffic-fatalities-2015) to help understand why 2015 was such a deadly year. As part of San Francisco's Code for San Francisco Brigade, we tried to understand what was driving this trend.

At first we searched for a root cause, like increases in distracted driving or temperatures that could explain the increase, but ultimately our analyses kept coming up short. Instead of trying to find a cause we asked a different question: what if the roads didn't actually become more dangerous? Could we disprove that?

It may seem obvious that the roads became more dangerous in 2015 since we know a lot more people died, but because the economy was recovering and gas was cheap people were also driving a lot more. More miles driven means more accidents even if the roads are just as safe per mile driven. When you account for total miles driven 2015 was still an increase over 2014, but it was a lower fatal accident rate per mile than it was in 2012.

[Fatalities since 2001]

We wanted to use more rigorous approach to test this theory so we tried two different statistical techniques to see if 2015 was an abnormally deadly year or fit in line with the overall trend since 2010. We also wanted to use these techniques to test some of the categories of fatalities that increased the most in 2015, such as bicyclists and multi-vehicle crashes.

## Analysis 1: Interrupted Time Series

The dependent variables in my analysis are total deaths. Totals deaths are stratified by age and type of death. In total, five regressions were estimated. The results are shown in two tables for readability sake. From the regression results, we can conclude that 2015 was not an abnormal year for deaths, when compared to the average trend of deaths in the prior years.

My empirical strategy is an interrupted time series design, also known as a segmented regression. The regression estimate is plain vanilla segmented regression with the addition of state level fixed effect. 

The canonical segmented regression with a fixed effect takes the following form. 

$$Y_{s, t} = \beta_0_{s,t} + \beta_1 Year_{s} + \beta_2 Post_{s, t} + \beta_3 Year_{s} * Post_{s,t}+ alpha_{s} + \epsilon_{s,t}$$

The variable $Y$ is the dependent variable of interest. $Year$ represents the time elapsed since the starting year. $Post$ is an indicator variable that is 0 for time period before and 1 for years 2015 and after. The intercept $\beta_0$ represents the baseline level at time 0. $\beta_1$ is the pre-2015 trend of the dependent variable. $\beta_2$ is the change following 2015 and $\beta_3$ is the change in the slope following 2015. Lastly, $\alpha$ is the state-level fixed effect. The subscripts $s$ and $t$ represent state and year respectively.

Our data does not contain subsequent years for 2015, making the interaction term unnecessary. In my analysis, I instead estimate the following regression.

$$y_{s, t} = \beta_0_{s,t} + \beta_1 Year_{s} + \beta_2 Post_{s, t} + alpha_{s} + \epsilon_{s,t}$$

The variable of interest here is the coefficient on the $Post$ variable. The coefficient tells us if 2015 is deviant in terms of the dependent variable. If 2015 is deviant, then the sign will be positive and significant. In all the regressions estimated, none of the coefficients are significant. This suggests that 2015 is not abnormal. 

The state-level fixed effect embeds unobservable heterogeneity that is assumed to fixed over time. For example, the regression does not control for demographics even though demographics may be an omitted variable. Demographics tend to evolve slowly so the assumption that it is fixed is reasonable. With the state-level fixed effect all unobserved heterogeneity in demographics at the state level is embedded in $alpha$.

The second test was X and the results were Y

Overall we unable to find evidence that the number of traffic fatalities in 2015 was abnormally high. We’re hoping to incorporate the 2016 data when it’s released so we can see if our analysis continues to support this finding. It’s a little disheartening to see that traffic safety hasn’t been getting better since 2009, but at least it’s not getting worse. Hopefully as newer safety technologies receive significant penetration such as automatic braking traffic safety will start getting better again.
